Intro Essay:

There is no agreed meaning of “indicator,” but for the purposes of our inquiry into indicators as an important emerging technology in the practice of global governance the concept can be delimited in the following way. An indicator is a named collection of rank-ordered data that purports to represent the past or projected performance of different units. The data are generated through a process that simplifies raw data about a complex social phenomenon. The data, in this simplified and processed form, are capable of being used to compare particular units of analysis (such as countries or institutions or corporations), synchronically or over time, and to evaluate their performance by reference to one or more standards. This working definition subsumes indexes, rankings, and composites which aggre- gate different indicators. Many of the best-known indicators are aggregations or “mash-up” compilations, 9 with substantial discretion available to the compiler in choosing what specific indicators to include, with what weightings and what devices to limit double-counting or to smooth over data unavailability. Examples include the HDI and the World Governance Indicators. While the processes and uses of aggregation raise many special issues, for the purposes of this volume the term “indicators” also includes these aggregations. We focus on the subset of indicators that are used for evaluation or judgment, and have effects specifically on decision-making or other effects in global governance. The term is also used in other ways—for example, to refer to a diagnostic characteristic (such as an indicator of a person who has been trafficked, or an indicator species for an ecosystem)—but these usages are outside the concept as used by the contributors to this volume. Indicators often take the form of, or can readily be transformed into, numerical data. A key challenge is whether and how indicators ought to be distinguished from other compilations of numerically rendered data. The differences lie in how indicators simplify “raw” data and then name the resulting product. That simplifi- cation can involve aggregation of data from multiple sources. It can also involve filtering that excludes certain data, including outliers or other data deemed to be

Indicators can also be contrasted with other representations of social phenome- na. In principle, any given social phenomenon can be represented in multiple ways. For example, the level of respect for the rule of law in a given country in a given year may be represented by an indicator such as a rule of law index. Alternatively, however, it might be represented by a paragraph of text describing patterns of respect or disregard for the rule of law during the relevant period, or by a series of striking photographs or a video recording. All of these representations may purport to capture the same phenomenon. Each involves some form of simplification (although the forms vary), and each may be given a suggestive name by its producer. However, the indicator is distinctive in the ways in which it represents and conveys compiled numerical data, and it has particular attractions as a means of representation for use in comparing or evaluating particular units of analysis. Different representations are likely to convey different impressions and stimulate different responses, in ways that vary with the type of audience. Indicators cater to demand for (and receptivity to) numerical, rank-ordered and comparable data.

1. Naming the indicator The assertion that an indicator has been brought into existence and given life is typically marked by naming it. The name itself is usually a simplification of what the index purports to measure or rank. The name’s constancy may mask changes over time in the indicator itself. Calling an indicator a measure of “transparency” or “human development” asserts a claim that there is such a phenomenon and that the numerical representation measures it. An indicator may even create the phenomenon it claims to measure, as IQ tests came to define intelligence. Labeling this measure an Indicator, Index, Ranking, League Table, etc. implies a claim to knowing and measuring a phenomenon. As a result, the indicator represents an assertion of power to produce knowledge and to define or shape the way the world is understood.

2. Rank-ordered structure All indicators are fundamentally comparative, and some element of ranking is a feature of the indicators we are studying. Indicators usually enable comparison of different units, but in a few cases only permit comparison of the same unit at different times. However, an indicator need not rank all data points or all units in a transitive way. Influential indicators are usually cardinal (attributing separately defined values to each unit), and most use one or other of a standard menu of scaling methods (e.g., a purely ordinal scale, an equal-interval scale, or a ratio scale), but it is possible to have an indicator which does not have these attributes. Some listings with most of the attributes of indicators may merely divide units into categories described nominally, identifying difference without ranking the cate- gories. These do not fall within our definition of an indicator. Other nominal listings may have an element of hierarchy among broad categories (red, yellow, green). These do qualify as indicators for our purposes.

3. Simplification Simplification (or reductionism) is central to the appeal (and probably the impact) of indicators. They are often numerical representations of complex phenomena intended to render these simpler and more comparable with other complex phe- nomena which have also been represented numerically. Indicators are typically aimed at policymakers and are intended to be convenient, easy to understand, and easy to use. Yet, the transformation of particularistic knowledge into numerical representations that are readily comparable strips meaning and context from the phenomenon. In this numerical form, such knowledge carries a distinctive author- ity that shifts configurations and uses of power and of counter-power. This transformation reflects, but also contributes to, changes in decision-making struc- tures and processes

Indicators also often present the world in black and white, with few ambiguous intermediate shades. They take flawed and incomplete data that may have been collected for other purposes, and merge them together to produce an apparently coherent and complete picture. Wendy Espeland and Mitchell Stevens identify this as a potential consequence of what March and Simon refer to as uncertainty absorption, which “takes place when inferences are drawn from a body of evidence, and the inferences instead of the evidence itself, are then communicated.”10 As Espeland and Stevens describe this process, “Raw” information typically is collected and compiled by workers near the bottom of organizational hierarchies; but as it is manipulated, parsed, and moved upward, it is transformed so as to make it accessible and amenable for those near the top, who make the big decision. This “editing” removes assumptions, discretion and ambiguity, a process that results in “uncer- tainty absorption”: information appears more robust than it actually is . . . the premises behind the numbers disappear, with the consequence that decisions seem more obvious than they might otherwise have been. An often unintended effect of this phenomenon is numbers that appear more authoritative as they move up a chain of command. The authority of the information parallels the authority of its handlers in the hierarchy.

Use of the indicator in evaluative processes requires that its audience include active evaluators. Those evaluators may or may not exert significant governance power over the actor being evaluated. An indicator may be taken up by its audience (sometimes without any explicit intention on their part) in social processes that do not directly involve evaluation, including: establishing or cementing key concepts (such as “human development”); influencing actor identities; condensing and redefining status and hierarchies in quantified forms, framing standards or causal theories which may then be rendered in other ways (for example, in an organiza- tional policy or a statement of best practices); influencing decisions as to what is measured or how statistics are compiled; crudely validating and calling into ques- tion other ideas or evaluative impressions. These other roles or uses of indicators do not alter the definitional requirement that an indicator must be capable of being used for evaluation, even while some of its roles and effects do not depend on the operation of specific evaluative processes

Governance comprises the means used to influence behavior, the production of resources and the distribution of resources. Thus governance is a broader concept than regulation, which refers to means used to influence the behavior of regulated actors (the Regulation and Governance approach); however, the distinction is often a fine one because the process of allocating resources, and even the process of generating or not generating resources, can also serve as a means of regulation. Analyses of the means and impacts of governance vary in focus. Some address mainly material allocations and influences, as in the epigram that politics is who gets what, when, and how.14 Others in Foucauldian or Marxian veins are concerned with the impact of power relations on identity and consciousness, the constitution of the subject, and the analysis of structures of power or domination which the actors may not themselves be aware of. Others examine governance in the interactions of largely autonomous systems,15 or in self-organizing systems that lack apparent intentionality,16 or in certain actor-network forms that have not (or not yet) supported the delineation and articulation of forms of authority and governance.


Recognizing indicators as a technology of global governance implies that actors who promulgate indicators ought to be counted among the governors, even if they otherwise would not be recognized as wielders of power in global governance, or would be only to a lesser extent. Thus indicators help constitute or embed power relations. Moreover, simple producers of indicators used in global governance, or actors whose decisions have a significant impact on the form or content of such indicators, may exercise power even where they are not the formal promulgators or users of the indicator. Including producers of indicators in the class of governors does not mean that tracing the strands of agency and power relations is necessarily straightforward. While in some cases (such as between credit rating agencies and their clients who pay to be rated) there is a symbiotic relationship between those who measure and those who are measured, particularly when the measured entity actively consents to the measuring, in other cases the measurer unilaterally exercises power over the measured. These complex and variegated power relations do not map neatly onto the distinction between governors and governed. Another complicating factor is that the production of the indicators used in global governance is often a collective process. In many cases promulgators attach their names to indicators whose production involves contributions from a number of other actors


Indicators may thus play roles in shaping highly decentralized or non-formal governance structures such as net- works.25 Indicators may be important in such governance modalities even where no clear delineation of governors and governed and interested public can be made, and where clear overarching human intentionality is lacking or where structural or non-animate elements (such as technological elements) greatly shape outcomes. 26 The use of indicators in global governance enhances the role played in global governance by the subset of the public that comprises the scientific community. The scientific community determines the scientific authority of an indicator, which in turn may affect the extent of the indicator’s influence. Producers of indicators are well aware of this fact. For example, Kaufmann and Kraay assert that their World Governance Indicators are more reliable because they are published in scientific journals and peer-reviewed. Indicators typically rest on claims to objectivity and social science knowledge, but they differ significantly in the extent to which they reflect social science research and analysis. There are close relations between indicators developed for social science theory testing and those which address policy questions, with the data and analysis of one informing the other.

As we have explained, indicators are standard-setting instruments. But while the processes which generate indicators ultimately result in the production of specific goals and targets against which societies are measured, they may be different from other more politically explicit standard-setting processes. 28 Whereas political efforts to formulate norms and standards, for example in multilateral inter-governmental negotiations conducted by diplomats, tend to involve processes such as voting or interest-group bargaining or the exercise of material power, the processes in specialist agencies and expert meetings where the standards embedded in indicators are produced, accepted, and supported tend to involve derivation of power from scientific knowledge. As the awareness or the significance of indicators as standards rises, indicator design and production are likely to become increasingly subject to demands made of other standard-setting processes, including demands for trans- parency, participation, reason-giving, and review. 29 Because indicators are by stipulation capable of being used in evaluation, they frequently blend standard-setting with evaluation, by conveying information such as a ranking of the state’s performance relative to that of other states and a direction of change in the state’s relative or absolute performance by comparison to previous iterations of the indicator. This has the potential to intensify demands for “due process,” especially within inter-governmental bodies, as each specific ranked entity has a direct focused interest, going beyond the general interest in good standards, which it may regard as conferring “standing” to raise a challenge.

In the practice of global governance, many decisions by governing entities are in some way influenced by indicators, although few rely entirely and mechanically on indicators. In the most straightforward case, an indicator promulgated by an extra- national entity is then used by that entity in generating or allocating resources or in influencing behavior. This is, for example, what the World Bank does in promul- gating “good governance” indicators that are used by the World Bank itself in deciding how to allocate aid. A modest extension of this occurs where one entity’s indicators are used for governance purposes by other entities in the same sector, as when the MCC uses World Bank indicators. A more subtle case arises where the promulgation of the indicator by an extra-national entity spurs demands and governance-related action by diffuse but nonetheless influential groups of other actors. For instance, the World Bank claims that it has prompted many countries to reform their legal systems simply by promulgating and promoting its country-level indicators on the ease of doing business. 30

The use of easily-produced or already-available indicators (which simplify more complex and unruly information) is likely to reduce the burden of processing information in the course of decision-making. In principle therefore, reliance on indicators should reduce the time, money, expertise, and other resources required to make decisions. One of the appeals of an indicator technology for human rights treaty bodies is to help in coping with the growing burden of processing country reports as the number of reports increases. On the other hand, selecting or amalgamating among a high volume of different indicators requires expertise and can be costly. It may be viable and attractive for a sophisticated organization. But a multiplication of indicators, some poorly grounded and some extensively marketed, may lead to confusion and worse decision-making for other organizations and their constituencies.

The cost–benefit attractions of relying on indicators are particularly pronounced when sophisticated numerical data and information processing technology are readily available. It seems likely that the expansion in the use of global indicators since the 1990s is linked to the increasing accessibility and quality of social and economic statistics, the ever-declining cost of computing, as well as improvements in and dissemination of statistical techniques. National statistical systems are generally in a long-run pattern of improvement (although there are also cases of decline in governmental statistical systems). For example, developers of an indicator for the right to health were already able, by the early 2000s, to present data on 72 indicators for 194 countries using data available on the Internet. 32

The cost–benefit attractions of relying on indicators are particularly pronounced when sophisticated numerical data and information processing technology are readily available. It seems likely that the expansion in the use of global indicators since the 1990s is linked to the increasing accessibility and quality of social and economic statistics, the ever-declining cost of computing, as well as improvements in and dissemination of statistical techniques. National statistical systems are generally in a long-run pattern of improvement (although there are also cases of decline in governmental statistical systems). For example, developers of an indicator for the right to health were already able, by the early 2000s, to present data on 72 indicators for 194 countries using data available on the Internet. 32

In some contexts, the quality of indicators may actually be a function of the total supply of indicators because some indicators are arguably most useful when aggregated with other similar indicators. 33 This raises the intriguing possibility that, at least for relatively sophisticated actors, the use of indicators may be a self- reinforcing phenomenon: as more indicators are produced, aggregations of indica- tors become more reliable, more indicators are used, more indicators are produced, et cetera. Greater supply of indicators also influences the ecology of indicators, with comparisons among them enabling selection of the most robust and reliable, and possibilities of continuous improvement

It seems plausible that reducing the costs of decision-making becomes more attractive (sometimes even imperative) as the amount of decision-making and the need for rapid decisions increases. Thus, the striking increase over the decades since 1990 in the creation and use of indicators as forms of knowledge for global governance arguably reflects the greater demand for readily available and easily used comparative knowledge to inform decision-making as well as the increasing supply of information. The reliance on indicators in global governance seems to be associated with developments such as increases in population and in levels of economic activity, which in turn determine the scale and intensity of social and economic interactions susceptible to governance, and with specific institutional developments affecting the nature of governance decision-making.

Pros of indicators:
ii. Consistency

To the extent that indicators provide unequivocal ordinal data, they can be translated into numerical form and used as inputs into decisions made in accor- dance with rules expressed in mathematical form (such as “approve the grant if (A * B)/C > 3”). A distinctive feature of rules that can be expressed as these kinds of mathematical operations is that they yield consistent results; given the same inputs, the output will be the same regardless of who is applying the rule or when it is being applied. Holding this process constant also enables consistency over time. Consistency is likely to increase the legal or moral authority of decision-making in some contexts.

iii. Transparency
==The simplicity of indicators makes it relatively easy to communicate them to third parties. This is significant whenever an effort is made to give third parties access to the informational basis for a decision; it should be relatively easy to communicate the basis for a decision based on indicators. This transparency can be superficial because the raw data used to construct indicators, and the methods used to simplify those data, are not necessarily easy to communicate and may in fact be treated as confidential. Even when such detailed information is provided, users may well not delve into the complexities and limitations of the underlying data and the analytic choices made in converting it into an indicator.

iv. Scientific authority 
Reliance on indicators has the potential to displace unmediated subjective data and replace it with data whose relevance and reliability has been endorsed, to some extent, by a community of scientists. This in turn means that the credibility of decisions based on indicators can depend in part on the extent to which the indicator is seen to be endorsed by various scientific communities and the amount of authority commanded by those communities. An indicator may gain credibility from its association with particularly prominent individual scholars.

v. Impartiality

Basing governance decisions solely on publicly disseminated indicators excludes the possibility of basing them on subjective considerations of, or private data known only to, the particular decision-maker. As Porter has argued, the less a governor is trusted the more appealing this kind of demonstrated impartiality becomes. 34 This impartiality is limited, however. The reasons for simplifying raw data in one way instead of another, or choosing to rely upon one indicator rather than another, may be highly subjective. The decision-maker may be involved in this process, whether by constructing the indicator, determining itself which indicator to use, or signaling a demand for an indicator conforming to its preferences which a supplier then meets. It is in any case almost inevitable that indicators are shaped by the knowledge and experience of the experts who produce them. This knowledge and experience may in some cases be dominated by that of the first movers or early adopters of quantification in a particular area of social policy

Contestation:

A great deal remains to be learned about when, how and why the governed (or rival governors) contest the use of indicators, but we expect it to take both general and long-established forms such as lobbying and litigation, as well as distinctive forms that are especially suited to changing or resisting governance through indicators, such as refusal to participate in data collection, challenges to scientific validity, or creation of alternative indicators. Contestation can take the form of debates about the data used and not used in indicators, the weightings criteria for the indicators, or about the embedded social and political theory of the indicator. Contestation strategies can include the creation of new indicators, and resistance to or discredit- ing of existing indicators and their producers or users. This may in turn prompt modifications to the indicator, or counter-strategies by producers and users.

==Because they obscure the socio-political theoretical claims embedded in their construction, the use of indicators can make it relatively difficult to contest the use of those theories in global governance. Indicators may mask large areas of missing or incomplete data, inability to draw significant distinctions between entities that are nonetheless hierarchically ranked, much higher levels of underlying uncertainty than the indicator depicts, and choices about weighting of different components of composite indicators (which in some notable privately produced indicators are not disclosed at all). On the other hand, those with special expertise in the construction or analysis of indicators can overcome these impediments to technical contestation and exercise greater influence than they could in purely political settings. Limita- tions in the ability to contest the exercise of power by global decision-makers tend to shift the balance of power toward “technical” experts, that is to say, people with expertise in the construction or analysis of indicators.

The rapid growth in prominent indicators in global governance is a time- compressed phenomenon that was initially sufficiently circumscribed for case studies about early patterns of debate, acceptance and challenge to be used as a basis for some cautious generalizations. Several of the most prominent indicators in global governance began as efforts led and shaped by social-science communities. Eventual “scientific” acceptance of these indicators can be traced back to a time before “public” knowledge is settled about the issue through various controversies and challenges. The development of these indicators instantiates, to some extent, the process of developing scientific knowledge described by Latour. 35 Like other forms of scientific knowledge production, an indicator builds on existing concepts, techniques, and categories of understanding that are taken for granted as correct, and on networks of experts. Indicators are shaped both by technical factors, such as the statistical properties of an indicator when compared to other indicators, and social factors, such as social networks, perceived expertise, relational interactions, institutions, and allies. 36

These processes are collective and take place over time. Once the indicator has been established with wide scientific support (even while continuous scientific debate and refinement remains part of the further life of the indicator), a process of wider public acceptance occurs, as networks of actors and institutions adopt the indicator and consequently increase its credibility and legitimacy, perhaps even converting it into a standard against which other indica- tors are evaluated.

The results of a survey we conducted of reporting about four major indicators— UNDP’s HDI, Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index, 37 Free- dom House’s Freedom in the World indicator,38 and the World Bank’s Doing Business indicators—in three major US and UK opinion-shaping newspapers and magazines are consistent with this model. 39 In the first year or two after an indicator is released, there is discussion and debate about the indicator itself, but after a few years, the indicator is presented in these news media largely as a fact that describes a country’s situation, with virtually no discussion about the source of the data or the nature of the indicator itself. In some cases, however, such as opposition from organized labour groups and the International Labour Organization to the ‘Em- ploying Workers’ component of the Doing Business indicators, efforts at contesta- tion can be intense. As such indicators have become more and more significant as technologies of global governance, the stakes of contestation have risen. Producers of indicators who may have viewed themselves as scientists or technicians working outside political and legal arenas, have been drawn into highly political conflicts

5. Regulation

One outcome of contestation can be demands for regulation of indicator-related processes and activities. Some of these demands instantiate general patterns of demands for increased transparency, reason-giving, participation, review, and ac- countability in global governance institutions and processes, particularly where public authority is being exercised, but also in relation to some private governance actors. ==Given the distinctive features of indicators as a technology of global governance, we expect growth in specifically adapted proposals or efforts to regulate indicators. These may take a variety of forms, several of which have been manifested in debates about regulation relating to sovereign debt ratings by credit rating agencies.== 41 For instance, producers of indicators could be subject to scrutiny (al- though not necessarily legal obligations) with reference to human rights standards, domestic constitutional norms, and principles of global administrative law. Others may be regulated in the same ways as private actors such as multinational corporations or networks of firms linked by transnational supply chains. ==These analogies suggest also the possible relevance of regulatory mechanisms such as competition law, transnational tort claims, and self-regulation. Procedural obligations on pro- ducers might require them to be transparent about the methods used to produce indicators and their limitations, to allow interested parties to participate in some way in the design process, and/or to accept some accountability in problematic cases for effects on external actors. Alternatively, producers might find their indicators held to externally administered standards of reliability and validity. Finally, structural interventions might be designed to foster healthy competition among producers. So, for example, public bodies might support or subsidize the production of competing indicators, or certain organizations already exercising other substantial powers as governors might be encouraged to refrain from pro- mulgating indicators.

Outline of the volume:

* Using case studies of indicators that are influential in global governance - university rankings, OECD PISA rankings, the UN Global Compact and Other indicators of "corporate social responsibility", measures of state fragility and state failure used differently by aid agencies and the military, the World Bank's influential neo-liberal "Doing Business" and "Investing Across Borders" global rankings, ratings of companies for social impact investors, indicators used to measure police performance, indicators measuring health systems, trafficking in persons, internal displacement in Colombia, the performance of humanitarian agencies in Haiti - chapters illuminate some of the hypotheses proposed in the previous section about the ways in which indicators operate and affect global governance. Focusing on the interplay of power and authority, dynamics of global and local indicators, relations between indicators and law, including human rights law and global administrative law
* Successful indicators become significant or authoritative as they accumulate networks of constituents, technologies and things
* Actor-network theory inspires the exploration by Ronen Shamir and Dana Weiss - the emergence of measurable and comparable representations of "corporate human-rights repsonsibility" - symbolic representation of indicators in maps, diagrams, social-branding lbaels - indicators generate secondary and even third tiered indicators - corporate human rights responsibility - a social performance which is enacted through two interacting modalities - regions and networks
* USAID on fragile, failing, failed states - trading language to talk about complex social realities which are highly heterogenous and about which there is little theoretical and empirical agreement - once the concept is pragmatically and provisionally in use - and used in a variety of diagnostic, prescriptive, evaluative ways - consistency with any outer reality is less significant for users than its correspondence with a set of acceptable uses and deplouyemnts 
* Katherin Pistor traces the history of the first generation of indicators of governmental institutional quality - global indicators bearing labels such as "rule of law", "security of property rights", "bureaucratic efficiency" - data was disseminated by private for profit groups or Freedom House, used in teh mid 1990s and transposed by economists into measures correlated with development success under the Washington Consensus mantra that "institutions matter"
	* -> it is not the creation of indicators that is problematic but the transposition of indicators designed for a narrow purpose into justifications for large-scale development policies by leading multilateral agencies, where neither the assumptoin of policymakers that led them to these raw data nor the reinterpretation of the data is further scrutinized - urged raw data be made readily available
* Efforts by intergovernmental financial institutions (IFIs) to measure the quality of national law on matters such as commercial law and corporate bankruptcy, use of legal assessments in promoting change through inter-country assessments, appraising change through intertemporal comparisons of a single-country
	* Ecology of partly competitive interactions between IFIs but also within IFIs - the roles and aspirations between IFIs but also within IFIs
	* roles and aspirations of IFI legal departments as they moved from providing legal services to engaging in development policy under the theory that "good" (reformed) national legal institutions were important to development and financial system resilience
	* WHO/UNICEF immunization coverage indicators have been used at times extending far beyond their purported scope - the global alliacne for vaccines and immunization (GAVI) uses the WHO/UNESCO DTP3 vaccine coverage indicator to determine the type of funding it will make available for a country
		* In the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries debt relief initiative - indicator is used as a requirement for the country to show progress on good governance - indicators are used as proxy measures for the overall quality of national health care systems  - absence of any other single indicator of national health system performance for making cross country comparisons'
Part III
* Those who are measured will try to influence the measurement - don't consider governance through indicators as a one-way, top to bottom process - bottom up generation of locally usable near real-time "active indicators" as preferable to top-down production of global indicators or donor-demanded indicators which engross external constituencies but have little real local saliance in direct management 
Part IV - relations between law, human rights values, indicators in human rights and humanitarian governance
* Indicators within the law of international human rights are criticized for pathologies identified in the literature on national audit practices - quantifying the not-adequately quantifiable, missing data and conoction of data, disguising the process of politics and judgment, measures becoming endogenous as targets, need to revise what is measured  -> development of indicators might address concerns about the perceived legitimacy of supervisory committees under the treaties - shoring up their authority through relying on social science and statistics - assessment of each state was based on quantified analysis applied to all states rather than acts of political judgment -> how to specifcy indicators when the rights are underspecified, improbability of structural and process indicators measuring major causal effects on outcomes, inability of indicator based approaches to free committess from acts of judgment -> illustrative indicators 
	* -> indicators play a role in helping peoples and publics to exert the pressures and constraints on governments that human rights advocates have long sought through the rights themselves
	* One factor slowing the development by inter-governmental bodies of compliance focused indicators under international treaties against human trafficking
	* Unilateralism can overcome a collective action problem - where all or most governments agree an indicator is desirable but cannot agree on effective criteria, decision rules and bargaining arrangements drive them down to the lowest common denominator of no indicator or an insipid one 
	* Unilateralism can function as a form of virtual representation where the individuals and groups who intended to benefit from performance of the treaty lack the influence to incentivize governments to perform the treat or to monitor performance - The US State Department's trafficking in persons indicators are produced under criteria set by US legislation  - the US unilateral approach to trafficking has probably provided an otherwise undresupplied public good (how things have changed! what were the hypocrisies in US dominance?)
	* Significance of global indicators in authoritarian contexts?
	* Sphere indicators are used by major donors to guide decisions on which NGOS to fund, peer NGOs as standards to hold each other to in order to maintain legitimacy of the whole industry - the indicators hae at times had some of the problems resulting from pathologides in incentives that characterize both indicators and regulation - sometimes people were limited so participants received of nutrition meeting Sphere levels - it has some regulatory silences, said little byefroe 2010 on the protection of local people (action to prevent forced displacement or ensure their free movement rather than de facto detention, continued after 2010 to lack indicators to measure performance on these issues)
	* Sarah Dadush - develompent and use of indicators and related reporting systems in social impact investing through the Global Impact Investment Rating System (FIIRS) and Impact REporting and Investment Standards (IRIS) - social issues are coming to be weighted in commercial investments, while market values are increasing inserted into philanthropy - quantification and emulation of comemrcial ratings and accounting make specialized investment impact indicators increasingly significant as bridging and blurring devices = shift away from local self expression of distinctiev community initiatives in specific developing country settings towarrds a standardized structure and language of global markets with which small scale entities have little choice but to conform                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

-> supposed tension between human rights and markets
-> World Bank Group's Investing Across Borders Index
-> understanding the models and techniques, their basis, the supposed laws
-> Paul Collier
-> evidence for the successes and failures of the washington consensus
-> coding and data analysis?